.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" The Merecat web server stems from both sthttpd and thttpd, both of
.\" which are free software under the 2-clause simplified BSD license.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995-2015  Jef Poskanzer <jef@mail.acme.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd Aug 3, 2019
.Dt MERECAT 8 SMM
.Os "merecat (2.32)"
.Sh NAME
.Nm merecat
.Nd Simple, small and fast HTTP server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl ghnrsSvV
.Op Fl c Ar CGI
.Op Fl d Ar PATH
.Op Fl f Ar FILE
.Op Fl I Ar IDENT
.Op Fl l Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl p Ar PORT
.Op Fl P Ar PIDFN
.Op Fl t Ar FILE
.Op Fl u Ar USER
.Op Ar WEBDIR
.Op Ar HOSTNAME
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
started out as a pun at Mongoose, which is another great web server, but
is now useful for actual web serving purposes.  It is however not a real
Meerkat, merely yet another copycat, forked from the great
.Nm thttpd
created by Jef Poskanzer.
.Pp
The limited feature set makes Merecat very quick:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
Virtual hosts
.It
URL-traffic-based throttling
.It
CGI/1.1
.It
HTTP/1.1 Keep-alive
.It
Built-in gzip deflate using zlib
.It
HTTPS support using OpenSSL/LibreSSL
.It
Dual server support, both HTTP/HTTPS from one process
.It
HTTP redirect support, per server.  E.g., possible to redirect from HTTP
to HTTPS.  Limited set of Nginx style environment variables supported.
.It
Native PHP support, using php-cgi, if enabled in
.Xr merecat.conf 5
.El
.Pp
The resulting footprint (~140 kiB) makes Merecat suitable for small and
embedded systems.
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax.  Some options
are, however, not available when
.Nm
is built with support for
.Pa /etc/merecat.conf .
The distributed archive comes with an example configuration file, which
should be fairly straightforward to comprehend.  For details on the
available configuration directives, see
.Xr merecat.conf 5 .
.Pp
The options, in their entirety, are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c Ar CGI
Wildcard pattern for CGI programs.  The config file setting for this
flag is
.Cm cgi-pattern = Ar PATTERN .
The default is
.Qq Ar **.cgi|/cgi-bin/* .
.Pp
For more details, see below.
.It Fl d Ar PATH
Directory to chdir() to after chrooting.  If you are not chrooting use
the
.Ar WEBDIR
to do a single chdir().  If you are chrooting, this lets you put the web
files in a subdirectory of the chroot tree, instead of in the top level
mixed in with the chroot files.  The config file setting for this flag is
.Cm data-directory = Ar DIR .
.It Fl f Ar FILE
The config file to read.  By default
.Nm
looks for
.Pa /etc/merecat.conf ,
unless the software has been configured to use a different prefix.
.Pp
If the default system coonfiguration file is missing, or if
.Nm
is started with
.Fl f Ar none ,
.Nm
will run in stand-alone mode using only command line options like
listening port and server root directory.
.It Fl g
Use global
.Pa .htpasswd
and
.Pa .htaccess
files.  This means that every file in the entire document tree is
protected by a single
.Pa .htpasswd
or
.Pa .htaccess
file at the top of the tree.  Otherwise the semantics of the
.Pa .htpasswd
and
.Pa .htaccess
files are the same.  If this option is set but there is no
.Pa .htpasswd
or
.Pa .htaccess
files in the top-level directory, then
.Nm
proceeds as if the option was not set \(em first looking for local
.Pa .htpasswd
and
.Pa .htaccess
files, and if they do not exist either then serving the requested file
without any password or access restriction.
.Pp
The config file setting for this flag is
.Cm global-passwd = Ar <true | false> .
.It Fl I Ar IDENT
The
.Xr syslog 3
identity to use for all log messages.  Useful when running multiple
servers.  Defaults to use the program name, i.e.
.Qq Nm .
.It Fl l Ar LEVEL
Set log level: none, err, info,
.Ar notice ,
debug
.It Fl n
Runs
.Nm
in the foreground like a regular program.  Required when when running in
a process monitor like Finit or systemd.  This also enables logging of
errors and warnings to stderr, which can be disabled with
.Fl s .
.It Fl p Ar PORT
Alternate TCP port number to listen on.  The default is 80.  The config
file setting for this flag is
.Cm port = Ar PORT .
.It Fl P Ar PIDFN
Optional PID file name.  By default the
.Ar IDENT
option, or its default value, is used to construct the PID file name.
Usually this results in
.Pa /var/run/merecat.pid .
If the argument to this option is an absolute path it will be used
as-is.  Otherwise the argument will be used as the basename for the PID
file.
.It Fl r
Do a chroot() at initialization time, restricting file access to the
program's current directory.  The config file setting for this flag
is
.Cm chroot = Ar <true | false> .
.It Fl s
Use syslog, even though running in foreground,
.Fl n .
.Nm
uses syslog by default, this option is only relevant when running in the
foreground to prevent warning and error messages to be printed to
stderr.
.It Fl S
Do explicit symbolic link checking.  Normally, merecat does not expand
any symbolic links in filenames.  For increased security this option can
be enabled to check that the resulting path stays within the original
document tree.  Note, that if you are using the chroot option, the
symlink checking is unnecessary and is turned off, so the safe way to
save those CPU cycles is to use chroot.  The config file setting for this
is
.Cm check-symlinks = Ar <true | false> .
.It Fl t Ar FILE
Enable throttling using this file with throttle settings.  See below for
details.
.It Fl u Ar USERNAME
User to drop privileges to to after initialization when started as root.
The default is
.Ar nobody ,
on some systems
.Ar www-data
is preferred.  The config file setting for this flag is
.Cm username = Ar USER .
.It Fl v
Do el-cheapo virtual hosting.  The config file setting for this
flag is
.Cm virtual-host = Ar <true | false> .
.It Fl V
Shows the current version info.
.It Ar WEBDIR
This optional argument is provided as a convenience \(em by default
.Nm
serves files from the current directory.  The config file setting for
this is
.Cm directory = Ar DIR .
.It Ar HOSTNAME
A second optional command line argument can be given to specify the
hostname to bind to, for multihoming.  The default is to bind to all
hostnames supported on the local machine.  See below for details.  The
config file setting for this flag is
.Cm hostname = Ar HOSTNAME .
.El
.Sh CHROOT
chroot() is a system call that restricts the program's view of the
filesystem to the current directory and directories below it.  It
becomes impossible for remote users to access any file outside of the
initial directory.  The restriction is inherited by child processes, so
CGI programs get it too.  This is a very strong security measure, and is
recommended.  The only downside is that only root can call chroot(), so
this means the program must be started as root.  However, the last thing
it does during initialization is to give up root access by becoming
another user, so this is safe.
.Pp
The program can also be compile-time configured to always
do a chroot(), without needing the -r flag.
.Pp
Note that with some other web servers, such as NCSA httpd, setting up a
directory tree for use with chroot() is complicated, involving creating
a bunch of special directories and copying in various files.  With
merecat it's a lot easier, all you have to do is make sure any shells,
utilities, and config files used by your CGI programs and scripts are
available.  If you have CGI disabled, or if you make a policy that all
CGI programs must be written in a compiled language such as C and
statically linked, then you probably don't have to do any setup at all.
.Pp
However, one thing you should do is tell syslogd about the chroot tree,
so that merecat can still generate syslog messages.  Check your system's
syslogd man page for how to do this.  In FreeBSD you would put something
like this in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf :
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    syslogd_flags="-l /usr/local/www/data/dev/log"

.Ed
Substitute in your own chroot tree's pathname, of course.  Don't worry
about creating the log socket, syslogd wants to do that itself.  (You
may need to create the dev directory.)  In Linux the flag is -a instead
of -l, and there may be other differences.
.Sh CGI
.Pp
Merecat httpd supports the CGI 1.1 spec.,
.Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3875 .
.Pp
In order for a CGI program to be allowed to run, its name must match the
pattern specified either at compile time, on the command line, or in the
config file.  This is a simple shell-style filename pattern.  Use * to
match any string not including a slash, or ** to match any string
including slashes, or ?  to match any single character.  Multiple
patterns separated by | can also be used.  The patterns get checked
against the filename part of the incoming URL.  Remember to quote any
wildcard characters so that the shell doesn't mess with them.
.Pp
Restricting CGI programs to a single directory lets the site admin
review them for security holes, and is strongly recommended.  If there
are individual users that you trust, you can enable their directories
too using the pipe syntax, e.g. "|/jef/**".
.Pp
To disable CGI as a security measure, either disable the default
.Cm CGI_PATTERN
in
.Pa merecat.h ,
or set the configuration file option to the empty string, like this:
.Cm cgi-pattern = Qq 
.Pp
Note: the current working directory when a CGI program gets run is the
directory that the CGI program lives in.  This isn't in the CGI 1.1
spec, but it's what most other HTTP servers do.
.Pp
Relevant
.Pa merecat.h
defines:
.Cm CGI_PATTERN, CGI_TIMELIMIT, CGI_NICE, CGI_PATH, CGI_LD_LIBRARY_PATH, CGIBINDIR .
.Sh BASIC AUTHENTICATION
Basic authentication is available as an option at compile time.  See the
included configure script for details.  When enabled, it uses a password
file in the directory to be protected, called
.Pa .htpasswd
by default.  This file is formatted as the familiar colon-separated
username/encrypted-password pair, records delimited by newlines.  The
utility program
.Xr htpasswd 1
is included to help create and modify
.Pa .htpasswd
files.
.Pp
.Nm
can use a global
.Pa .htpasswd
file if started with the
.Fl g
switch, or you can rely on a per directory file which also protects
subdirectories.
.Pp
Relevant
.Pa merecat.h
define:
.Cm AUTH_FILE
.Sh ACCESS RESTRICTION
Access restriction is available as an option at compile time.  If
enabled, it uses an access file in the directory to be protected,
called
.Pa .htaccess
by default.  This file consists of a rule and a host address or a
network range per line.  Valid rules are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm allow from
The following host address or network range is allowed to access the
requested directory and its files.
.It Cm deny from
The following host address or network range is not allowed to access the
requested directory and its files.
.El
.Pp
There are three ways to specify a valid host address or network range:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm IPv4 host address ,
e.g. 10.2.3.4
.It Cm IPv4 network with subnet mask ,
e.g. 10.0.0.0/255.255.0.0
.It Cm IPv4 network using CIDR notation ,
e.g. 10.0.0.0/16
.El
.Pp
.Nm
can use a global
.Pa .htaccess
file if started with the
.Fl g
switch, or you can rely on a per directory file which also protects
subdirectories.
.Pp
Note that rules are processed in the same order as they are listed in the
access file and that the first rule which matches the client's address is
applied (there is no order clause).
.Pp
So if there is no allow from 0.0.0.0/0 at the end of the file the default
action is to deny access.
.Pp
Relevant
.Pa merecat.h
define:
.Cm ACCESS_FILE
.Sh THROTTLING
.Pp
The throttle file lets you set maximum byte rates on URLs or URL groups.
You can optionally set a minimum rate too.
The format of the throttle file is very simple.
A # starts a comment, and the rest of the line is ignored.
Blank lines are ignored.
The rest of the lines should consist of a pattern, whitespace, and a number.
The pattern is a simple shell-style filename pattern, using ?/**/*, or
multiple such patterns separated by |.
.Pp
The numbers in the file are byte rates, specified in units of bytes per second.
For comparison, a v.90 modem gives about 5000 B/s depending on compression,
a double-B-channel ISDN line about 12800 B/s, and a T1 line is about
150000 B/s.
If you want to set a minimum rate as well, use number-number.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  # throttle file for www.acme.com

  **              2000-100000  # limit total web usage to 2/3 of our T1,
                               # but never go below 2000 B/s
  **.jpg|**.gif   50000   # limit images to 1/3 of our T1
  **.mpg          20000   # and movies to even less
  jef/**          20000   # jef's pages are too popular
.Ed
.Pp
Throttling is implemented by checking each incoming URL filename against
all of the patterns in the throttle file.  The server accumulates
statistics on how much bandwidth each pattern has accounted for recently
(via a rolling average).  If a URL matches a pattern that has been
exceeding its specified limit, then the data returned is actually slowed
down, with pauses between each block.  If that's not possible (e.g. for
CGI programs) or if the bandwidth has gotten way larger than the limit,
then the server returns a special code saying
.Qq try again later .
.Pp
The minimum rates are implemented similarly.  If too many people are
trying to fetch something at the same time, throttling may slow down
each connection so much that it's not really useable.  Furthermore, all
those slow connections clog up the server, using up file handles and
connection slots.  Setting a minimum rate says that past a certain point
you should not even bother \(em the server returns the
.Qq try again later
code and the connection is not even started.
.Pp
There is no provision for setting a maximum connections/second throttle,
because throttling a request uses as much CPU as handling it, so there
would be no point.  There is also no provision for throttling the number
of simultaneous connections on a per-URL basis.  However you can control
the overall number of connections for the whole server very simply, by
setting the operating system's per-process file descriptor limit before
starting merecat.  Be sure to set the hard limit, not the soft limit.
.Sh MULTIHOMING
Multihoming means using one machine to serve multiple hostnames.  For
instance, if you're an internet provider and you want to let all of your
customers have customized web addresses, you might have
www.joe.acme.com, www.jane.acme.com, and your own www.acme.com, all
running on the same physical hardware.  This feature is also known as
virtual hosts.  There are three steps to setting this up.
.Pp
One, make DNS entries for all of the hostnames.  The current way to do
this, allowed by HTTP/1.1, is to use CNAME aliases, like so:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  www.acme.com IN A 192.100.66.1
  www.joe.acme.com IN CNAME www.acme.com
  www.jane.acme.com IN CNAME www.acme.com
.Ed
.Pp
However, this is incompatible with older HTTP/1.0 browsers.  If you want
to stay compatible, there is a different way - use A records instead,
each with a different IP address, like so:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  www.acme.com IN A 192.100.66.1
  www.joe.acme.com IN A 192.100.66.200
  www.jane.acme.com IN A 192.100.66.201
.Ed
.Pp
This is bad because it uses extra IP addresses, a somewhat scarce
resource.  But if you want people with older browsers to be able to
visit your sites, you still have to do it this way.
.Pp
Step two.  If you're using the modern CNAME method of multihoming, then
you can skip this step.  Otherwise, using the older multiple-IP-address
method you must set up IP aliases or multiple interfaces for the extra
addresses.  You can use ifconfig(8)'s alias command to tell the machine
to answer to all of the different IP addresses.  Example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  ifconfig le0 www.acme.com
  ifconfig le0 www.joe.acme.com alias
  ifconfig le0 www.jane.acme.com alias
.Ed
.Pp
If your OS's version of ifconfig doesn't have an alias command, you're
probably out of luck (but see
.Lk http://www.acme.com/software/thttpd/notes.html
for more info).
.Pp
Third and last, you must set up merecat to handle the multiple hosts.
The easiest way is with the
.Fl v
flag.  This works with either CNAME multihosting or multiple-IP
multihosting.  What it does is send each incoming request to a
subdirectory based on the hostname it's intended for.  All you have to
do in order to set things up is to create those subdirectories in the
directory where merecat will run.  With the example above, you'd do like
so:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  mkdir www.acme.com www.joe.acme.com www.jane.acme.com
.Ed
.Pp
If you're using old-style multiple-IP multihosting, you should also create
symbolic links from the numeric addresses to the names, like so:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  ln -s www.acme.com 192.100.66.1
  ln -s www.joe.acme.com 192.100.66.200
  ln -s www.jane.acme.com 192.100.66.201
.Ed
.Pp
This lets the older HTTP/1.0 browsers find the right subdirectory.
.Pp
There is an optional alternate step three if you're using multiple-IP
multihosting: run a separate merecat process for each hostname This
gives you more flexibility, since you can run each of these processes in
separate directories, with different throttle files, etc.  Example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  merecat -r         /usr/www      www.acme.com
  merecat -r -u joe  /usr/www/joe  www.joe.acme.com
  merecat -r -u jane /usr/www/jane www.jane.acme.com
.Ed
.Pp
Remember, this multiple-process method does not work with CNAME
multihosting \(em for that, you must use a single merecat process with
the
.Fl v
flag.
.Sh CUSTOM ERRORS
merecat lets you define your own custom error pages for the various HTTP
errors.  There is a separate file for each error number, all stored in
one special directory.  The directory name is
.Pa errors/ ,
at the top of the web directory tree.  The error files should be named
.Pa errNNN.html ,
where NNN is the error number.  So for example, to make a custom error
page for the authentication failure error, which is number 401, you
would put your HTML into the file
.Pa errors/err401.html .
If no custom error file is found for a given error number, then the
usual built-in error page is generated.
.Pp
In a virtual hosts setup you can also have different custom error pages
for each host.  In this case you put another
.Pa errors/
directory in the top of that virtual host's web tree.
.Nm
will look first in the virtual host errors directory, and then in the
server-wide errors directory, and if neither of those has an appropriate
error file then it will generate the built-in error.
.Sh NON-LOCAL REFERERS
Sometimes another site on the net will embed your image files in their
HTML files, which basically means they're stealing your bandwidth.  You
can prevent them from doing this by using non-local referer filtering.
With this option, certain files can only be fetched via a local referer.
The files have to be referenced by a local web page.  If a web page on
some other site references the files, that fetch will be blocked.  There
are three config file variables for this feature:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm url-pattern = Qq Ar **.jpg|**.gif|**.au|**.wav
A wildcard pattern for the URLs that should require a local referer.
This is typically just image files, sound files, and so on.  For
example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  urlpat = "**.jpg|**.gif|**.au|**.wav"
.Ed
.Pp
For most sites, that one setting is all you need to enable referer filtering.
.It Cm check-referer = Ar <true | false>
By default, requests with no referer at all, or a null referer, or a
referer with no apparent hostname, are allowed.  With this variable set,
such requests are disallowed.
.It Cm local-pattern = Qq Ar PATTERN
A wildcard pattern that specifies the local host or hosts.  This is used
to determine if the host in the referer is local or not.  If not
specified it defaults to the actual local hostname.
.El
.Sh SYMLINKS
.Nm
is very picky about symbolic links.  Before delivering any file, it
first checks each element in the path to see if it is a symbolic link,
and expands them all out to get the final actual filename.
.Pp
Along the way it checks for things like links with
.Qq ..
that go above the server's directory, and absolute symlinks (ones that
start with a /).  These are prohibited as security holes, so the server
returns an error page for them.
.Pp
This means you cannot set up your web directory with a bunch of symlinks
pointing to individual users' home web directories.  Instead you do it
the other way around \(em the user web directories are real
subdirectories of the main web directory, and in each user's home
directory there is a symlink pointing to their actual web directory.
.Pp
The CGI pattern is also affected \(em it gets matched against the
fully-expanded filename.  So, if you have a single CGI directory but
then put a symbolic link in it pointing somewhere else, that will not
work.  The CGI program will be treated as a regular file and returned to
the client, instead of getting run.  This could be confusing.
.Sh PERMISSIONS
.Nm
is also picky about file permissions.  It wants data files (HTML,
images) to be world readable.  Readable by the group that the merecat
process runs as is not enough \(em
.Nm
checks explicitly for the world-readable bit.  This is so that no one
ever gets surprised by a file that's not set world-readable and yet
somehow is readable by the HTTP server and therefore the *whole* world.
.Pp
The same logic applies to directories.  As with the standard UNIX
.Cm ls
program,
.Nm
will only let you look at the contents of a directory if its read bit is
on; but as with data files, this must be the world-read bit, not just
the group-read bit.
.Pp
.Nm
also wants the execute bit to be *off* for data files.  A file that is
marked executable but doesn't match the CGI pattern might be a script or
program that got accidentally left in the wrong directory.  Allowing
people to fetch the contents of the file might be a security breach, so
this is prohibited.  Of course if an executable file *does* match the
CGI pattern, then it just gets run as a CGI.
.Pp
In summary, data files should be mode 644 (rw-r--r--), directories
should be 755 (rwxr-xr-x) if you want to allow indexing and 711
(rwx--x--x) to disallow it, and CGI programs should be mode 755
(rwxr-xr-x) or 711 (rwx--x--x).
.Sh LOGS
.Nm
does all of its logging via
.Xr syslog 3 .
All log messages are prepended with the program name, unless the command
line option
.Fl I Ar IDENT
is used.  The facility defaults to
.Ar LOG_DAEMON .
Aside from error messages, there are only a few log entry types of
interest, all fairly similar to CERN Common Log Format:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left
  Aug  6 15:40:34 acme merecat[583]: 165.113.207.103 - - "GET /file" 200 357
  Aug  6 15:40:43 acme merecat[583]: 165.113.207.103 - - "HEAD /file" 200 0
  Aug  6 15:41:16 acme merecat[583]: referer http://www.acme.com/ -> /dir
  Aug  6 15:41:16 acme merecat[583]: user-agent Mozilla/1.1N
.Ed
.Pp
Note that
.Nm
does not translate numeric IP addresses into domain names.  This is both
to save time and as a minor security measure (the numeric address is
harder to spoof).
.Pp
If started in the foreground,
.Fl n ,
and with debug log level,
.Fl l Ar debug ,
logs will also be printed on stderr, unless the user also requested
.Fl s .
However, not all systems support the
.Ar LOG_PERROR
option to
.Fn openlog .
.Pp
Relevant
.Pa merecat.h
define:
.Cm LOG_FACILITY.
.Sh SIGNALS
.Nm
handles a couple of signals, which you can send via the standard UNIX
.Xr kill 1
command:
.Bl -tag -width INT,TERM
.It Cm INT,TERM
These signals tell
.Nm
to shut down immediately.
.It Cm USR1
This signal tells
.Nm
to toggle log level, between current log level and LOG_DEBUG.  If
.Nm
was started with LOG_DEBUG the toggle will be to LOG_NOTICE, which is
the default log level.
.It Cm USR2
This signal tells
.Nm
to generate the statistics syslog messages immediately, instead of
waiting for the regular hourly update.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr merecat.conf 5 ,
.Xr redirect 8 ,
.Xr ssi 8 ,
.Xr htpasswd 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -split
.An Jef Poskanzer Aq jef@mail.acme.com
wrote the famous
.Nm thttpd
which
.Nm
is based on.
.An Joachim Nilsson Aq troglobit@gmail.com
introduced all new shiny bugs.
.Sh THANKS
.An -nosplit
.Nm
is a fork of
.Nm sthttpd ,
which in turn is a fork of
.Nm thttpd .
So first and foremost, a huge thanks to
.An Jef Poskanzer
for creating
.Nm thttpd
and making it open source under the simplified 2-clause BSD license!
.An Anthony G. Basile
deserves another thank you, for merging Gentoo patches and refactoring
the build system in
.Nm sthttpd .
.Pp
Also, many thanks to contributors, reviewers, testers: John LoVerso,
Jordan Hayes, Chris Torek, Jim Thompson, Barton Schaffer, Geoff Adams,
Dan Kegel, John Hascall, Bennett Todd, KIKUCHI Takahiro, Catalin
Ionescu, Anders Bornäs, and Martin Olsson.  Special thanks to Craig
Leres for substantial debugging and development during the early days of
.Nm thttpd .
