.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" The Merecat web server stems from both sthttpd and thttpd, both of
.\" which are free software under the 2-clause simplified BSD license.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995-2015  Jef Poskanzer <jef@mail.acme.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd Aug 3, 2019
.Dt MERECAT.CONF 5
.Os "merecat (2.32)"
.Sh NAME
.Nm merecat.conf
.Nd merecat httpd configuration file
.Sh INTRODUCTION
When
.Nm merecat
starts up it looks for its configuration file,
.Pa /etc/merecat.conf .
This manual page documents the settings available, which allows for more
advanced setups.  For simpler use-cases, however, you may not need a
.Nm
since the server runs fine with only command line parameters.
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The syntax of the config file is UNIX style
.Cm key = value ,
separated by whitespace.  The
.Dq #\&
character marks the start of a comment to end of line.  The \\ character
can be used as an escape character.
.Pp
.Em Note:
changes to the configuration file are require a restart of
.Nm merecat ,
unlike many other UNIX daemons
.Cm SIGHUP
does not reload the
.Pa .conf
file.
.Ss Configuration Directives
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm charset = Qq Ar UTF-8
Character set to use with text MIME types.  If the default unicode
charset causes trouble, try "iso-8859-1".
.It Cm check-referer = Ar <true | false>
Enable check for external sites referencing material on your web server.
For more information on referrers, see
.Xr merecat 8 .
Disabled by default.
.It Cm check-symlinks = Ar <true | false>
For increased security, set this to true.  Unless running chrooted in
which case this is not really necessary.  Disabled by default.
.It Cm chroot = Ar <true | false>
Change web server root to
.Ar WEBDIR ,
or the current directory, if no
.Ar WEBDIR
is given as argument.  Chrooting is a security measure and means that
.Nm
cannot access files outside it, unless files are bind mounted, or
similar into the chroot.  Disabled by default.
.It Cm compression-level = Ar -1..9
Control the compression level of the built-in Apache-like mod_deflate.
The default value is -1, which gives a reasonable compromize between
speed and compression.  To disable compression set this to
.Ar 0
and to get maximum compression,
.Ar 9 .
.Pp
The default setting,
.Ar -1 ,
means all "text/*" MIME type files, larger than 256 bytes, are
compressed before sending to the client.
.It Cm directory = Ar DIR
If no WEBDIR is given on the command line this option can be used to
change the web server document root.  Defaults to the current directory.
.It Cm data-directory = Ar DIR
When chrooting this can be used to adjust the web server document root.
.It Cm global-passwd = Ar <true | false>
Set this to true to protect the entire directory tree with a
single
.Pa .htpasswd
and/or
.Pa .htaccess
file.  When unset, which is the default,
.Nm
looks for a local
.Pa .htpasswd
and
.Pa .htaccess
file, or serves the file without password.
.It Cm hostname = Ar HOSTNAME
The hostname to bind to when multihoming.  For more details on this, see
below discussion.
.It Cm list-dotfiles = Ar <true | false>
If dotfiles should be skipped in directory listings.  Disabled by default.
.It Cm local-pattern = Qq Ar PATTERN
Used with
.Cm check-referer ,
see
.Xr merecat 8
for more details.
.It Cm max-age = Ar SEC
Max number of seconds to be used in a
.Qq Ar Cache-Control: max-age
header to be returned with all responses.  An equivalent
.Qq Ar Expires
header is also generated.  The default is no Cache-Control or Expires
headers, which is just fine for most sites.
.It Cm port = Ar PORT
The web server Internet port to listen to, defaults to 80, or 443 when
HTTPS is enabled.  See the
.Cm ssl
section below for more on configuring an HTTPS server.
.It Cm url-pattern = Qq Ar PATTERN
Used with
.Cm check-referer ,
see
.Xr merecat 8
for more details.
.It Cm username = Qq Ar NAME
Set username to drop privileges to after startup.  Defaults to "nobody"
which usually is defined on all UNIX systems.
.It Cm virtual-host = Ar <true | false>
Enable virtual hosting, disabled by default.  For more information on
this, see
.Xr merecat 8 .
.It Cm user-agent-deny = Qq Ar PATTERN
Wildcard pattern to deny access to illicit hammering bots.  When set a
matching user-agent will receive a 403 for all its requests.  Use for
instance
.Qq **SemrushBot**
or
.Qq **SemrushBot**|**MJ12Bot**|**DotBot**
to match multiple user-agents.  The default is to allow all user-agents.
.It Cm cgi Qo Ar PATTERN Qc Cm {
Wildcard pattern for CGI programs, for instance
.Qq **.cgi
or
.Qq **.cgi|/cgi-bin/* .
See the dedicated CGI section in
.Xr merecat 8
for more on this.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm enabled = Ar <true | false>
The CGI module is disabled by default.
.It Cm limit = Ar NUM
Maximum number of allowed simultaneous CGI programs.  Default 1.
.El
.It Cm }
.It Cm php Qo Ar PATTERN Qc Cm {
Wildcard pattern for PHP scripts, for instance
.Qq **.php
or
.Qq **.php5|**.php4|**.php .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm enabled = Ar <true | false>
The PHP module is disabled by default.
.It Cm cgi-path = Qq Pa /path/to/php-cgi
Default is
.Qq Pa /usr/bin/php-cgi
.El
.It Cm }
.It Cm ssi Qo Ar PATTERN Qc Cm {
Wildcard pattern for triggering SSI, for instance
.Qq **.shtml
or
.Qq **.shtml|**.stm|**.shtm .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm enabled = Ar <true | false>
The SSI module is disabled by default.
.It Cm cgi-path = Qq Pa /path/to/ssi
Default is
.Qq Pa cgi-bin/ssi .
See
.Xr ssi 8
for more information.
.It Cm silent = Ar <true | false>
This setting can be used to silence “[an error occurred while processing
the directive]”, shown when an error occurrs during SSI processing.
Default disabled (false).
.El
.It Cm }
.It Cm ssl Cm {
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm protocol = Qq Ar PROTOCOL
Minimum SSL/TLS protocol level to enable.  Can be one of:
.Ar SSLv3, TLSv1, TLSv1.1, TLSv1.2, TLSv1.3 .
The default minimum protocol is
.Ar TLSv1.1 .
Note, some (Linux) distributions have
.Ar SSLv3
disabled by default in their OpenSSL packages.
.It Cm ciphers = Qq Ar CIPHERS
The preferred list of ciphers the server supports.  For a list of
available ciphers, see the
.Xr ciphers 1
man page.  The default covers both TLSv1.3 (new ciphersuite) and
older cipher list:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256:TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256: \\
HIGH:!aNULL:!kRSA:!PSK:!SRP:!MD5:!RC4:!DHE-RSA-CAMELLIA256-SHA:             \\
!DHE-RSA-CAMELLIA128-SHA:!ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:                      \\
!DHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:!DHE-RSA-AES256-CCM8:!DHE-RSA-AES256-CCM:        \\
!DHE-RSA-AES128-CCM8:!DHE-RSA-AES128-CCM
.Ed
.Pp
.It Cm certfile = Ar /path/to/cert.pem
Public part of HTTPS certificate, required for HTTPS.
.It Cm keyfile = Ar /path/to/key.pem
Private key of HTTPS certificate, required for HTTPS.  This file must
be kept private and should not be in the WEBROOT directory.
.It Cm dhfile = Ar /path/th/dhparam.pem
Optional Diffie-Hellman parameters.  Not secret, unlike the
.Cm keyfile
the
.Cm dhfile
can be published online, if necessary.  Create one like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
openssl dhparam -out dhparam.pem 2048
.Ed
.El
.It Cm }
.It Cm server Ar name Cm {
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm port = Ar PORT
Server port to listen to.
.It Cm ssl Cm { Ar ... Cm }
Same as the global settings, above, only this is for this server only.
.It Cm redirect Qo Ar PATTERN Qc {
.Bl -tag -offset "" -compact
.It Cm code = Ar CODE
HTTP redirect code to use, default: 301.  Supported codes are: 301, 302,
303, 307.
.It Cm location = Qq Ar proto://$host:port$request_uri$args
Location to return for redirect, e.g. to redirect all request for HTTP
to HTTPS for the same (virtual) host:
.Pp
.Bd -unfilled -offset "" -compact
redirect "/**" {
    code = 301
    location = "https://$host$request_uri$args"
}
.Ed
.El
.It Cm }
.El
.It Cm }
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -split
.An Jef Poskanzer Aq jef@mail.acme.com
wrote the famous
.Nm thttpd
which
.Nm
is based on.
.An Joachim Nilsson Aq troglobit@gmail.com
added the .conf file parser and this man page.
