.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" The Merecat web server stems from both sthttpd and thttpd, both of
.\" which are free software under the 2-clause simplified BSD license.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995-2015  Jef Poskanzer <jef@mail.acme.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd Aug 3, 2019
.Dt REDIRECT 8 SMM
.Os "merecat (2.32)"
.Sh NAME
.Nm redirect
.Nd Simple redirection CGI program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Three steps to set up a redirection:
.Bl -enum
.It
Make sure your web server is set up to allow CGI programs.
.It
Make a symbolic link from the file or directory you want to redirect,
pointing at this program in the CGI bin directory.
.It
Add an entry to the file ".redirects" in the directory where your http
server runs CGI programs.  For most servers, this is the directory where
the given CGI program lives.
.El
.Sh SYNTAX
The format of the .redirects file is a bunch of lines with a filename,
whitespace, and the new URL.  For example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    /test/oldfile.html    http://www.acme.com/test/newfile.html

.Ed
The easiest way to figure out precisely what filename to put
into .redirects is to set up the symlink and then click on it.  You'll
get back a "404 Not Found" page which includes the filename as received
by the redirect program, and that's what you want to use.
.Pp
You can also add a wildcard specification to redirect whole groups of
files.  For example:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    /wildtest/*          http://www.acme.com/test-

.Ed
will cause an access to the /wildtest/somefile.html to be redirected to
http://www.acme.com/test-somefile.html. (Note that the asterisk need not
be preceded by a slash.)
.Pp
.Em Note:
.Nm
is designed for use with
.Xr thttpd 8
and
.xr merecat 8,
but the latter has its own built-in redirect support today which is
probably what you want.  Using
.Nm
with other web servers may require some hacking.  A possible gotcha is
with the symbolic link from the old file pointing at this script -
servers other than thttpd may not allow that link to be run as a CGI
program, because they don't check the link to see that it points into
the allowed CGI directory.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr thttpd 8 ,
.Xr merecat 8 ,
.Xr merecat.conf 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jef Poskanzer Aq jef@mail.acme.com
.Sh BUGS
It would be really cool to have this program look for the .redirects
file in the same directory as the file being redirected, instead of in
the binaries directory.  Unfortunately, this appears to be impossible
with the information CGI gives, plus the non-standardized but widespread
practice of running CGI programs in the directory where the binary
lives.  Perhaps CGI 1.2 will address this.
.Pp
The wildcard mechanism is very primitive.  In particular, any characters
that follow the asterisk are blithely ignored.
