.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" The Merecat web server stems from both sthttpd and thttpd, both of
.\" which are free software under the 2-clause simplified BSD license.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995-2015  Jef Poskanzer <jef@mail.acme.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd July 13, 2019
.Dt SSI 8 SMM
.Os "merecat (2.32)"
.Sh NAME
.Nm ssi
.Nd Server-Side-Includes CGI program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This is an external CGI program that provides the same functionality as
the built-in server-side-includes feature in many HTTP daemons.  It is
written for use with
.Xr thttpd 8
and
.Xr merecat 8 ,
but should be easy to adapt to other systems.
.Pp
There are two ways to use this; the modern way of using a
.Cm .shtml
pattern in
.Xr merecat.conf 5
to trigger the SSI script, which requires enabling the SSI module.  Then
there is the traditional
.Xr thttpd 8
approach.  We start with the relevant settings needed in
.Nm merecat.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ssi {
    enabled = true
    pattern = "**.shtml"	# default
    cgi-path = "cgi-bin/ssi"    # default, web server root is used
}
.Ed
.Pp
The traditional
.Nm thttpd
way runs ssi as a simple CGI script, which requires placing the ssi
binary in the web server CGI area, and enabling CGI.  Then set up URLs
with the path to the document to parse as the "pathinfo".  That's the
part of the URL that comes after the CGI program name.  For example, if
the URL to this program is:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    http://www.acme.com/cgi-bin/ssi

.Ed
and the url for the document is:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    http://www.acme.com/users/wecoyote/doc.html

.Ed
then the compound URL would be:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    http://www.acme.com/cgi-bin/ssi/users/wecoyote/doc.html

.Ed
.Sh "INCLUDE FORMAT"
The format description below is adapted from
.Aq http://hoohoo.ncsa.uiuc.edu/docs/tutorials/includes.html .
.Pp
All directives are formatted as SGML comments within the document.  This
is in case the document should ever find itself in the client's hands
unparsed.  Each directive has the following format:
.Bd -unfilled -offset left

    <!--#command tag1="value1" tag2="value2" -->

.Ed
.Em Note:
the lack of space between the initial HTML comment start and the
#command.  This is explicitly stated in the standard and strictly
enforced by all web servers implementing SSI.
.Pp
Each command takes different arguments, most only accept one tag at a
time.  Here is a breakdown of the commands and their associated tags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm config
The config directive controls various aspects of the file parsing.
There are two valid tags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm timefmt
gives the server a new format to use when providing dates.  This is a
string compatible with the
.Xr strftime 3
library call.
.It Cm sizefmt
determines the formatting to be used when displaying the size of a file.
Valid choices are bytes, for a formatted byte count (formatted as
1,234,567), or abbrev for an abbreviated version displaying the number
of kilobytes or megabytes the file occupies.
.It Cm errmsg
overrides the default;
.Qq [an error occurred while processing this directive]
.El
.It Cm include
Inserts the text of another document into the parsed document.  The
inserted file is parsed recursively, so it can contain
server-side-include directives too.  This command accepts two tags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm virtual
Gives a virtual path to a document on the server.
.It Cm file
Gives a pathname relative to the current directory. ../ cannot be used
in this pathname, nor can absolute paths be used.
.El
.It Cm echo
Prints the value of one of the include variables (defined below).  Any
dates are printed subject to the currently configured timefmt.  The only
valid tag to this command is var, whose value is the name of the
variable you wish to echo.
.It Cm fsize
prints the size of the specified file, subject to the sizefmt parameter
to the config command.  Valid tags are the same as with the include
command.
.It Cm flastmod
prints the last modification date of the specified file, subject to the
formatting preference given by the timefmt parameter to config.  Valid
tags are the same as with the include command.
.El
.Sh VARIABLES
A number of variables are made available to parsed documents.  In
addition to the CGI variable set, the following variables are made
available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm DOCUMENT_NAME
The current filename.
.It Cm DOCUMENT_URI
The virtual path to this document (such as /~robm/foo.shtml).
.It Cm QUERY_STRING_UNESCAPED
The unescaped version of any search query the client sent.
.It Cm DATE_LOCAL
The current date, local time zone.  Subject to the timefmt parameter to
the config command.
.It Cm DATE_GMT
Same as
.Cm DATE_LOCAL
but in Greenwich mean time (GMT).
.It Cm LAST_MODIFIED
The last modification date of the current document.  Subject to timefmt
like the others.
.El
.Sh "BUGS"
Does not implement all "modern" SSI directives are supported. E.g.,
.Cm exec cgi
and
.Cm exec cmd
or any control directives like
.Cm if, elif, else, endif,
etc.  Patches and pull-requests are welcome :)
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr merecat 8 ,
.Xr merecat.conf 5 ,
.Xr strftime 3
.Sh AUTHOR
Jef Poskanzer
.Aq mailto:jef@mail.acme.com
wrote the original, and
Joachim Nilsson
.Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com
added some minor features and enabled support for
.Cm .shtml
pattern matching in
.Nm merecat .
